The Chairman:
 The hearing will begin. We have an overflow room, I believe. Is that true?

The Clerk:
 Yes, sir.

The Chairman:
 Okay, so there is an overflow room for people who can't find seats. We have gotten the agreement of the Chairman and the Secretary, preliminary to any opening statements, to stay until 1 p.m. We will probably have some votes, so we will maximize our time.
    Let me remind the members that Chairman Bernanke will be before this committee next week for the Humphrey-Hawkins hearing on the economy. Members are obviously free to raise anything they want today, but it is my hope that we would focus on these very important questions of financial regulation. I know there are members who want to review what happened with Bear Stearns and then what we do going forward, but I personally believe the best use of the committee's time today would be to focus on those structural questions and regulatory questions.
    We will have the Chairman before us for 3 more hours next week to talk about the economy and Humphrey-Hawkins; and, again, I would urge members to do that. All members are free, as we know, to bring up whatever they want, but that would be our hope, because I did note that some of the members of the committee had asked previously for a hearing to look into what happened with Bear Stearns. And I said at the time that I thought that was very important. I believed it was best to do that in this broader context. Members want to get a new context because the experience regarding Bear Stearns is clearly the context in which much of this hearing is and much of what we will be talking about is what happens if that should occur. So those are the parameters.
    Given the importance of this, and given the interest of members in speaking, we are going to hold pretty firmly to the 5-minute rule. And, obviously, we are not going to completely finish in 5 minutes, but no question can be asked after the 5 minutes have expired. We will allow the answers to conclude. But I am going to have to restrain myself and others from asking any questions after the 5 minutes.
    Under the rules that apply when we have cabinet and cabinet-level officials, there are two opening statements on each side, the chairs and ranking members of the appropriate subcommittees. In this case, it seems clear to me that it is the Financial Institutions Subcommittee that is the developing subcommittee so that is how we will proceed. The official part of the hearing will now begin and I will recognize myself for a fairly strict 5 minutes.
    When I was about to become chairman of this committee in 2006, I was told by a wide range of people that our agenda should be that of further deregulating. I was told that the excess regulation in America from Sarbanes-Oxley and other acts was putting American investment companies and financial institutions at a competitive disadvantage and that people much prefer the softer touch of the financial services authority to the harshness of the American regulatory structure. Things have changed.
    Where there was a strong argument as recently as November of 2006 that we had been over-regulating the financial system, I believe the evidence is now clear that we are in one of the most serious economic troubles that we have seen recently, in part because of an inadequacy of regulation.
    Clearly, that has been the case with regard to subprime mortgages, but what has been striking is not simply that we had the problems with subprime mortgages, but that those problems infected so much of the financial system, including, I must say, many in Europe. One of the things though that I do take away from that set of conversations, and then it's a fairly clear one is that what we do, and I believe there is a consensus now among people in the Administration, among many of us in Congress, and among people in the financial industry, that an increase in regulation is required. It must be done sensibly. It must be market sensitive.
    But I believe we have seen a significant shift from the notion that the most important issue was to deregulate further to one recognizing the need for more sensible regulation, but more regulation. It is clear that this needs to be done in the context of international cooperation, and I am encouraged to believe, and the first trip this committee took when I became chairman was to Belgium and London to meet with people from the European Union and Great Britain in terms of their financial regulation. This needs to be done with international cooperation and I think the prospects of that are very good. I think there was a broad international recognition that some form of increased regulation was necessary. And the form we are talking about is regulation of risk-taking outside the very narrowly defined commercial banking. Innovation is very important, and an innovation that has brought a great deal of benefit during the last few decades is securitization.
    Securitization replaces the lender-borrower relationship and the discipline that you have in the lender-borrower relationship. A very large part of our problem is that we have not yet found sufficient replacement for the discipline of a lender not lending to a borrower unless the lender is sure that the borrower will be able to repay. Something that simple causes problems in subprime, and it has caused problems elsewhere.
    We have had too many loans made without sufficient attention to whether or not the loans could be repaid. And, what we now have is a contagion, because people who bought loans in various forms that they shouldn't have bought are now resistant to buying things that they should buy.
    That is why I believe regulation properly done, regulation of risk that is too unconstrained today, because the various risk management techniques that were supposed to replace the lender-borrower relationship have not been successful. Diversification and quantitative models and the rating agencies, we have not yet replaced them. Some form of regulatory authority is necessary. If properly done, a market sensitive regulatory authority not only prevents some of the problems, but is pro-market, because we have investors now who are unwilling to invest even in things they should.
    Many of our nonprofit institutions and our State and local governments have been the victims of this. So our job, I believe--and I congratulate the officials of this Administration for having done a good job in the current legal context of dealing with these problems--is to look at what happened, to look at what is now going on, and to decide what should be done to provide a better statutory framework for the increase in regulation that I believe people agree should happen.
    The gentleman from Alabama.

Mr. Bachus:
 I thank the chairman for holding this hearing on systemic risk and the appropriate regulatory responses to managing that risk and I know there will be short-term responses, and at some time in the future maybe a new regulatory structure which will take time.
    The two public servants before us today I think are eminently qualified to speak to these issues and we welcome Secretary Paulson and Chairman Bernanke. They had agencies whose mandates and responsibilities are broad and are deep, but the issue of systemic risk also requires the involvement of other significant and capable regulators, including particularly the SEC and the Federal banking regulators.
    It is my expectation that the leaders of these agencies will appear at a subsequent hearing with their comments and that will supplement our understanding and the testimony we gather today on this difficult issue, and I trust that Secretary Paulson and Chairman Bernanke agree that a collaborative effort that includes these agencies is going to be needed if we are to have a successful outcome.
    To say we are living through interesting times in our financial markets is to state the painfully obvious. We have seen a run on what was then the Nation's 5th largest investment bank, Bear Stearns. We have seen the Federal Reserve intervene in order to avoid a cascading effect from Bear Stearns's collapse that could have spread throughout the financial system with what I believe would have been decidedly negative implications for the larger economy.
    And we have seen the Federal Reserve take steps or a series of steps that in the short term at least have brought a measure of confidence and stability to the financial markets. But now that the immediate crisis created by the run on Bear Stearns has passed, we face some difficult, long-term policy questions.
    Perhaps the most critical question is, have we arrived at the place where virtually every primary dealer is considered too big or too interconnected to fail? The logical extension of this too big to fail perception is that markets no longer work and that the government must not only exercise greater control of our capital markets, but also be the ultimate guarantor of financial solvency; that would be a conclusion I could not endorse.
    And in reading over the remarks of Secretary Paulson in London, I see that you did not endorse it, either. A far better alternative is to restore market discipline within appropriate regulatory bounds. I believe we have reached a consensus that we must establish a modern, regulatory structure to strengthen the safety and soundness of our institutions and discourage unsound practices and conduct. However, these regulations should not and cannot ensure that institutions will never fail. And if one does fail, we must ensure that taxpayers are not left holding the bag.
    Thanks to the fast action of the Federal Reserve in cooperation with the SEC and the Treasury, we dodged a bullet when Bear Stearns collapsed. We may not be so lucky next time. For that reason, I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses about what we can do to provide for an orderly resolution in the event a large financial institution fails.
    The regulatory regime we establish and follow must accomplish three things: ensure market discipline; provide a shock absorber against systemic risk; and, first and foremost, protect the taxpayer. To preserve market discipline and discourage moral hazard, we must see to it that no firm should be considered too big or interconnected to fail. To protect against systemic risk, we must ensure that when a firm fails, it does not bring down the entire financial system with it, i.e., an orderly liquidation. And to protect the taxpayer, we have to make sure that the cost of that failure is borne by the firm's shareholders and creditors, and not passed on to the taxpaying public.
    In conclusion, of necessity we have to plan for how to handle the failure of a major institution. It is important, however, that we create a system focused not on failure, but on success. In doing so, we must also resist the temptation to over-regulate in our zeal to discourage practices such as overleveraging an excessive risk-taking that put institutions at risk of failure. This is a tall order.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing, and thank you to our witnesses.

The Chairman:
 The gentleman from Pennsylvania is now recognized and will temporarily preside.

Mr. Kanjorski:
 Mr. Chairman, this hearing comes at a critical juncture. As the economy reels from a widespread, far-reaching financial crisis that continues to wreak havoc on everything from the housing market to student loans, while we remain focused on many current economic difficulties average Americans face, we must simultaneously look to the future to determine how to prevent or at least mitigate future crises.
    Financial innovation and the proliferation of complex and exotic financial instruments are probably inevitably going to occur under our capitalist system. But we must develop innovative, regulatory and oversight responses to keep pace as these market transactions evolve. One such proposal worth considering is the Systemic Risk Reduction Act of 2008 put forth by the Financial Services Roundtable.
    This bill seeks to make regulation more efficient by closing gaps in our regulatory structure and by promoting consolidation and cooperation among regulatory agencies. Their proposal includes a provision of particular interest to me; namely, it proposes establishing a bureau similar in concept to the Office of Insurance Information which passed the Capital Markets Subcommittee yesterday.
    Without a Federal repository to collect and analyze information on insurance issues, we cannot fully understand and control systemic risk. The Roundtable proposal would also expand the authority of the Federal Reserve so that investment banks who borrow from the Fed's discount window in various facilities do not get a free pass.
    No one else can borrow money without conditions, and the American people do not expect that the investment bank be allowed to do so.
    Chairman Bernanke spoke 2 days ago and raised many of these issues and offered ideas for consideration, noting that the financial turmoil since August underscores the need to find ways to make the financial system more resilient and more stable. I whole-heartedly agree. He further stated that the Fed's powers and responsibilities should be commensurate.
    It is the job of Congress to strike that proper balance. While many concur that the Federal Reserve's move to bail out Bear Stearns in March of this year was necessary to prevent a financial meltdown, most also agree that we should be concerned about setting precedents with broad ramifications down the road. Taxpayers cannot be asked to bail out financial institutions, and we should look for ways to prevent such dire situations from arising in the future.
    Another area germane to today's discussion is speculation. Specifically, we must determine to what extent speculation in commodities futures has hurt American consumers by artificially inflating the price of oil, energy, and other goods. I appreciate the ongoing debate on speculation with economists, traders, pundits, and politicians staking out various positions on the issue. To the extent that we can glean further insight from our panelists today, that would be of tremendous help, for it is true that speculators bear blame. Then congressional action in the form of increased oversight in authority is warranted.
    on a related note, I am very interested in consolidating the regulation of our securities and commodities markets. While the CFTC currently has jurisdiction of this market, the Treasury's recommendation to merge SEC and FCTC seems a sensible course of action for Congress.
    We need to take this action now and I look forward to working with the Administration.

The Chairman:
 The gentlewoman from Illinois.

Mrs. Biggert:
 Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for holding today's hearing on systemic risk.
    Your responsiveness to the letter submitted in April by Mr. Garrett, Ranking Member Bachus, and more than a dozen of us on this side of the aisle is very much appreciated, and I would also like to thank Congressman Garrett for his leadership on this issue.
    I welcome our distinguished witnesses today: Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke; and Treasury Secretary Paulson. Your steady leadership is helping us weather the storm that our markets and our economy are experiencing. As a side, Secretary Paulson, I would like to specifically thank you and your staff, as well as the public and private sector partners for organizing the HOPE NOW Alliance, which has helped to keep hundreds of thousands of families in their homes.
    And Chairman Bernanke, the Federal Reserve's actions continue to help preserve confidence and bring stability to our financial markets and institutions. Infusing liquidity into the marketplace has prevented the credit crunch from seizing the system, and facilitating the sale of Bear Stearns to J.P. Morgan is viewed by many as having been the lynchpin that prevented a run-on-the-bank type crises which could have spread throughout our financial system and caused irreparable harm.
    What brought us here today are these specifically and the latter actions on the part of the Fed, actions that begged the question, what can the Federal Government do to prevent future, similar bailouts that can put taxpayer dollars at risk? Is the Federal Government prepared for another Bear Stearns? Can a Federal regulator or regulators monitor specific indicators that will flag weaknesses within individual, financial institutions and prevent another Bear Stearns? And can they do so without unnecessarily increasing regulatory burdens that would diminish the competitiveness of the U.S. financial institutions in the global marketplace?
    It is vital that we closely examine the capacity of the Federal Government to monitor the large financial institutions like Bear Stearns, which represent not only American innovation and financial strength, but also our great vulnerability with respect to systematic risk in the financial system.
    I think without delay, we need to strike the right balance and create a simpler, stronger, regulatory system that preserves the resilience of our economy, protects taxpayers, and maintains the position of our financial system as the envy of the world.
    I look forward to the testimony and I yield back.

The Chairman:
 I think the gentlewoman.
    We will now go to the opening statements, and a subject to which I sometimes pay insufficient attention is protocol. We don't usually have two such distinguished witnesses. The question is, who goes first?
    I think the order, certainly, of succession to the Presidency is which Department was established first. And, I think, Mr. Paulson, that you have about 125 years on Mr. Bernanke, so we will begin with you. STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE HENRY M. PAULSON, JR., SECRETARY,
                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Secretary Paulson:
 Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Bachus, thank you very much for holding this hearing and for your leadership on these very important issues.
    As you know, our financial markets have been experiencing turmoil since last August. It will take additional time to work through these challenges. Progress has not come in a straight line, but much has been accomplished. Our financial institutions are repricing risk, de-leveraging, recognizing losses, raising capital, and improving their financial position. Their ability to raise capital even during times of stress is a testament to our financial institutions and to our financial system.
    Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are also working through this challenging period. They play an important and vital role in our economy and housing markets today, and they need to continue to play an important role in the future. Their regulator has made clear that they are adequately capitalized.
    Market practices and discipline on the part of financial institutions and investors are also improving. Our regulators are shining a light on our challenges. Through the President's Working Group on Financial Markets, we have issued a report analyzing the causes of the turmoil and recommending a comprehensive policy response, implementation of which is well underway.
    Regulators are enhancing guidance, issuing new rules, and communicating more effectively across agencies domestically and internationally.
    Although our regulatory architecture and authorities are outdated and less than optimal, we have been working together; while respecting our different authorities or responsibilities, we have been working together to ensure the stability of the financial system, because it is in the interest of the American people that we do so.
    Today this is by far our most important priority. And our seamless cooperation to achieve it is made possible by the leadership and support provided by this committee and by other leaders in Congress. I have confidence in our regulators and markets. We need to remain focused and continue to address challenges with your support and with your help. But we will ultimately emerge with strong capital markets, which will in turn enable our economy to continue to grow.
    Now looking beyond this period of market stress, which will eventually pass as these situations always do, I have presented my ideas for improving our regulatory structure and expanding our emergency powers. I look forward to discussing these ideas with you today, even as we continue our primary focus on confronting current challenges and maintaining stable, orderly financial markets.
    In March, I laid out a Blueprint for a Modernized Financial Regulatory Structure in which we recommended a U.S. regulatory model based on objectives that more closely link the regulatory structure to the reasons why we regulate. Our model proposes three primary regulators: One focused on market stability across the entire financial sector; another focused on safety and soundness at institutions supported by a Federal guarantee; and the third focused on protecting consumers and investors.
    A major advantage of this structure is its timelessness and its flexibility, and that because it is organized by a regulatory objective rather than by financial institution category, it can more easily respond and adapt to the ever-changing marketplace.
    If implemented, these recommendations eliminate regulatory competition that creates inefficiencies and can engender a race to the bottom. The Blueprint also recommends a number of near-term steps. These include formalizing the current informal coordination among U.S. financial regulators by amending and enhancing the Executive Order which created the President's Working Group on Financial Markets, and while retaining State level regulation of mortgage origination practices, creating a new Federal level commission, the Mortgage Origination Commission, to establish minimum standards for among other things personal conduct and disciplinary history, minimum educational requirements, testing criteria and procedures, and appropriate licensing revocation standards.
    The Blueprint includes recommendations on a number of intermediate steps as well, focusing on payment and settlement systems in areas such as futures and securities, where our regulatory structure severely inhibits our competitiveness.
    We recommended the creation of an optional Federal charter for insurance companies similar to the current dual charter system for banking, and that the thrift charter has run its course and should be phased out. We also recommend the creation of a Federal charter for systemically important payment and settlement systems, and that these systems should be overseen by the Federal Reserve in order to guarantee the integrity of this vital--

The Chairman:
 Mr. Secretary, I don't want you to feel constrained. Both you and the Chairman should ignore the time limits. We will be constrained by them, but this is too important for you to be, so please, both of you can ignore the red lights.

Secretary Paulson:
 Okay. I am just about finished.

The Chairman:
 No, I didn't mean to--

Secretary Paulson:
 Okay.

The Chairman:
 Just the opposite. We have enough time to listen to this, so please don't be constrained.

Secretary Paulson:
 When we released the Blueprint, I said that we were laying out a long-term vision that would not be implemented soon. Since then, the Bear Stearns episode and market turmoil more generally have placed in stark relief the outdated nature of our regulatory system and has convinced me that we must move much more quickly to update our regulatory structure and improve both market oversight and market discipline.
    Over the last several weeks, I have recommended important steps that the United States should take in the near term, all of which move us toward the optimal regulatory structure outlined in the Blueprint. I will summarize these briefly.
    First, Americans have come to expect the Federal Reserve to step in to avert events that pose unacceptable systemic risk. But the Fed does not have the clear statutory authority, nor the mandate to do this. Therefore, we should consider how to most appropriately give the Federal Reserve the authority to access necessary information from complex financial institutions, whether it is a commercial bank, an investment bank, a hedge fund, or another type of financial institution, and the tools to intervene to mitigate systemic risk in advance of a crisis.
    The MOU recently finalized between the SEC and the Federal Reserve is consistent with this long-term vision of the Blueprint, and should help inform future decisions, as our Congress considers how to modernize and improve our regulatory structure.
    Market discipline is also critical to the health of our financial system, and must be reinforced, because regulation alone cannot eliminate all future bouts of market instability. For market discipline to be effective, market participants must not expect that lending from the Fed or any other government support is readily available. I know from firsthand experience that normal or even presumed access to a government backstop has the potential to change behavior within financial institutions with their creditors. It compromises market discipline and lowers risk premiums, ultimately putting the system at greater risk.
    For market discipline to effectively constrain risk, financial institutions must be allowed to fail. Today, two concerns underpin expectations of regulatory intervention to prevent a failure. They are that an institution may be too interconnected to fail or too big to fail.
    Steps are being taken to improve market infrastructure, especially where our financial firms are highly intertwined. The OTC Derivatives market and the triparty repurchase agreement market, which is the marketplace through which our financial institutions obtain large amounts of secured financing, must be improved. It is clear that some institutions, if they fail, can have a systemic impact.
    Looking beyond immediate market challenges, last week I laid out my proposals for creating a resolution process that ensures the financial system can withstand the failure of a large, complex financial firm. To do this, we will need to give our regulators additional emergency authority to limit temporary disruptions. These authorities should be flexible, and to reinforce market discipline, the trigger for invoking such authority should be very high, such as a bankruptcy filing.
    Any potential commitment of government support should be an extraordinary event that requires the engagement of the Treasury Department and contains sufficient criteria to prevent cost to the taxpayer to the greatest extent possible.
    This work will not be done easily. It must begin now and begin in earnest. Again, thank you for your leadership.
    [The prepared statement of Secretary Paulson can be found on page 67 of the appendix.]STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE BEN S. BERNANKE, CHAIRMAN, BOARD OF
            GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

Mr. Bernanke:
 Thank you. Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the committee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss financial regulation and financial stability.
    The financial turmoil that began last summer has impeded the ability of the financial system to perform its normal functions and has adversely affected the broader economy. This experience indicates a clear need for careful attention to financial regulation and financial stability by the Congress and other policymakers.
    Regulatory authorities have been actively considering the implications of the turmoil for regulatory policy and for private sector practices. In March, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets issued a report and recommendations for addressing the weaknesses revealed by recent events.
    At the international level, the Financial Stability Forum has also issued a report and recommendations. Between them, the two reports focused on a number of specific problem areas, including mortgage lending practices and their oversight, risk measurement and management at large financial institutions, the performance of credit rating agencies, accounting and evaluation issues, and issues relating to the clearing and settlement of financial transactions.
    Many of the recommendations of these reports were directed at regulators in the private sector and are already being implemented. These reports complement the Blueprint for regulatory reform issued by the Treasury in March, which focused on broader questions of regulatory architecture.
    Work is also ongoing to strengthen the framework for prudential oversight of financial institutions. Notably, recent events have led the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to consider higher capital charges for such items as certain complex structured credit products, assets and banks trading books, and liquidity guarantees provided to off-balance sheet vehicles. New guidelines for banks liquidity management are also being issued.
    Regarding implementation, the recent reports have stressed the need for supervisors to insist on strong risk measurement and risk management practices that allow managers to assess the risk that they face on a firm-wide basis.
    In the remainder of my remarks, I will comment briefly on three issues. The supervisory oversight of primary dealers, including the major investment banks, the need to strengthen the financial infrastructure, and the possible need for new tools for facilitating the orderly liquidation of a systemically important securities firm.
    Since the near collapse of the Bear Stearns companies in March, the Federal Reserve has been working closely with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which is the functional supervisor of each of the primary dealers and the consolidated supervisor of the four large investment banks, to help ensure that those firms have the financial strength needed to withstand conditions of extreme market stress.
    To formalize our effective working relationship, the SEC and the Federal Reserve this week agreed to a memorandum of understanding. Cooperation between the Fed and SEC is taking place within the existing statutory framework, with the objective of addressing the near-term situation.
    In the longer term, however, legislation may be needed to provide a more robust framework for prudential supervision of investment banks and other securities dealers. In particular, under current arrangements, the SEC's oversight of the holding companies of the major investment banks is based on a voluntary agreement between the SEC and those firms. Strong holding company oversight is essential, and thus in my view the Congress should consider requiring consolidated supervision of those firms and providing the regulator the authority to set standards for capital liquidity holdings and risk management.
    At the same time, reforms in the oversight of these firms must recognize the distinctive features of investment banking and take care neither to unduly inhibit innovation, nor to induce a migration of risk-taking activities to less-regulated or offshore institutions.
    The potential vulnerability of the financial system to the collapse of Bear Stearns was exacerbated by weaknesses in the infrastructure of financial markets, notably in the markets for over-the-counter derivatives and in short-term funding markets.
    The Federal Reserve together with other regulators in the private sector is engaged in a broad effort to strengthen the financial infrastructure. For example, since September 2005, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has been leading a major joint initiative by both the public and private sectors to improve arrangements for clearing and settling credit default swaps and other OTC derivatives.
    The Federal Reserve and other authorities are also focusing on enhancing the resilience of the markets for triparty repurchase agreements, in which the primary dealers and other large banks and broker-dealers obtain very large amounts of secured financing from money funds and other short-term risk-averse investors.
    In these efforts we aim not only to make the financial system better able to withstand future shocks, but also to mitigate moral hazard and the problem of too big to fail by reducing the range of circumstances in which systemic stability concerns might prompt a government intervention.
    More generally, the stability of the broader financial system requires key payment and settlement systems to operate smoothly under stress and to effectively manage counterparty risk. Currently the Federal Reserve relies on a patchwork of authorities, largely derived from our role as a banking supervisor as well as on moral suasion to help ensure that the various payment and settlement systems have the necessary procedures and controls in place to manage the risks that they face.
    By contrast, many major central banks around the world have an explicit statutory basis for their oversight of payment and settlement systems. Because robust payment and settlement systems are vital for financial stability, the Congress should consider granting the Federal Reserve explicit oversight authority for systemically important payment and settlement systems.
    The financial turmoil is ongoing and our efforts today are concentrated on helping the financial system to return to more normal functioning. It is not too soon, however, to think about steps that might be taken to reduce the incidence and severity of future financial crises.
    In particular, in light of the Bear Stearns episode, the Congress may wish to consider whether new tools are needed for ensuring an orderly liquidation of a systemically important securities firm that is on the verge of bankruptcy together with a more formal process for deciding when to use those tools.
    Because the resolution of a failing securities firm might have fiscal implications, it would be appropriate for the Treasury to take a leading role in any such process, in consultation with the firm's regulator and other authorities.
    The details of any such tools and the associated decision-making process require more study. One possible model is the process currently in place under the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act, or FDICIA, for dealing with insolvent commercial banks. The fiducial procedures give the FDIC the authority to act as a receiver for an insolvent bank and to set up a bridge bank to facilitate an orderly liquidation of that firm. The fiducial law also requires that failing banks be resolved in a way that imposes the least cost to the government, except when the authorities through a well-defined procedure determine that following the least cost route would entail significant systemic risk.
    To be sure, securities firms differ significantly from commercial banks in their financing, business models, and in other ways, so the fiducial rules are not directly applicable to these firms.
    Although designing a resolution regime appropriate for securities firms would be a complex undertaking, I believe it would be worth the effort. In particular, by setting a high bar for such actions, the adverse effects on market discipline could be minimized.
    Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Chairman Bernanke can be found on page 61 of the appendix.]

The Chairman:
 Thank you. Let me begin with the Secretary, because I was pleased to note in your statement that you understand that the regulator at OFHEO, of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, believe that they are now adequately capitalized. They were important institutions and I think that was--I'm pleased that you made that statement. I think that is important for people to understand.
    I said before that we are talking about more regulation done sensibly. Obviously there are still areas that the Secretary indicated where we could improve by simplifying regulation. That doesn't mean that it means more regulation everywhere. But there does seem to me to be emerging a consensus that we need a regulator concerned with threats to the systemic stability of the economy, that come from unconstrained risk-taking in a group of financial institutions outside the commercial banking system. And I was pleased, Mr. Secretary, that you mentioned hedge funds and investment banks. I think it would be a great mistake to talk about type of institution. That would give people an incentive to change their hats.
    We are talking about the impact of the activity, and we are talking I think, and a consensus appears to be emerging that it is going to be the Federal Reserve. I have to say that there are people who say, well, either you create a brand new regulator, it seems to me, which would be I think a mistake, or you give it to the Federal Reserve. And I agree with both of you, that in order to do that, the Federal Reserve needs more power. A situation in which the Federal Reserve is available and is under pressure to provide funding, but does not have the ability to act well before that time to diminish the need for that and to oppose conditions, that is unacceptable.
    We are talking, but we should be clear, about an increase in regulatory power. And let me say, you know, there was a time when the notion of requiring hedge funds to register was very controversial. It does seem to me that we have clearly gone beyond that. We are talking about giving the Federal Reserve the power to not just get information but to deal with various things which could include capital requirements and other factors.
    Now those are very important issues, and I think, as I said, there was a consensus emerging that it should be the Federal Reserve. And I have to say when people say, ``Well,'' they'll have this or that question about whether the Federal Reserve should do it, I invoke, as people have heard me do, the wisdom of a great 20th Century philosopher, Henny Youngman. The maxim was, ``How's your wife? Compared to what?'' And the Federal Reserve compared to what? I don't see any alternative to the Federal Reserve.
    But my question is this. I think this is an important task, and there's a great deal of agreement, that we should be moving to empower the Federal Reserve to have regulatory authority over a wide range of financial institutions in recognition in part of the fact that they have a systemic impact and that the current situation puts the Fed in an untenable position of being given a set of expectations to respond when it doesn't have the full panoply of tools to respond.
    But here is the question: How soon? Now we are where we are. It is July of an election year. This is a very complex subject. We don't want to do anything that would interfere with our wonderful financial system. And I mean our wonderful financial system, which has been so productive. We want to curb abuses without interfering with the productive function.
    Mr. Secretary, you said that they don't now have that authority, and we all agree with that. Is it essential that we move now? My sense is this--and I applaud the signing of the memorandum of understanding between the SEC and the Fed. That kind of cooperation has been useful. The cooperation between your two entities has been useful.
    I guess there are two options. One is that we have to try and legislate something now. And let me say we should distinguish. Mr. Secretary, you had a broader set of recommendations involving thrift institutions and credit unions, and a whole lot of things that no one in this institution is eager to deal with. So nobody is in any hurry on those. But we have I think taken out of that--and you have elaborated with the resolution issue--the question of macro-stability regulator, of the Federal Reserve being given powers to deal with the problems that could come to a system from someone too big or too unconnected to fail.
    Here is the question: Working together as we have within existing authorities, with yourselves, with I hope cooperation--that you understand cooperation with us--can we get by until the end of the year? We obviously will start working on this. Is it your view that immediate legislation is necessary? Or are we able to get by, given the cooperation we have had, given the kind of support we try to give you as much as possible, and begin working immediately together, so that early next year, one of the first items on the congressional agenda will be the legislation you talked about? Let me ask each of you to respond.

Secretary Paulson:
 Mr. Chairman, let me respond by saying first of all, the role of the Fed as a macro stability regulator will take time to think through. It's a complex question. It's an important question. The authorities that will go with that, how that will work. That will clearly take some time to consider and to get the legislation through.
    Even more pressing is--which is again a complex issue which will take time--is the issue of the resolution process and procedures for complex financial institutions that aren't federally insured. We both talked about that. And so in terms of priorities, that should be even the higher priority in terms of time. But that will take some time.
    I think what you are getting at is even though our system may not optimal, the authorities may not be optimal, we have been able to work together to protect the system by communicating with Congress, and that's our plan and our expectation that we are going to need to keep doing that, and we are going to work in that way, recognizing that the requests we have made are not things that can be implemented immediately.

The Chairman:
 Mr. Chairman?

Mr. Bernanke:
 I would associate myself with Secretary Paulson's remarks. We are working together extremely cooperatively, the Secretary and I, and the other agencies. Obviously, we'd like to have additional tools, but these are very complex matters, as the Secretary has indicated. So my hope would be that the Congress would begin soon to think hard about these issues, and we are happy of course to provide whatever support we can. But I think for the time being that the most likely outcome and the expectation is that we will continue to work in a creative way together to try to manage these ongoing situations.

The Chairman:
 I'm going to break my own rule just to make one statement, because I gather what you're saying is, it is better in this very complex and very important set of issues that we do it right and that we do it very quickly.

Mr. Bernanke:
 I would agree with that.

The Chairman:
 The gentleman from Alabama.

Mr. Bachus:
 Thank you. I think there is a consensus that there needs to be a single regulator for market stability, and I think that is in the Treasury's Blueprint. But short term, what are your present powers that you could bring to bear near term on risk management on containing risk, containing systemic risk, what are some things that you can do right now?

