Mr. Johnson.
 Thank you, Senator. I strongly support the Volcker Rules, as everybody is starting to call them, in terms of the principles they put forward.
    I think there are two main principles. The first is that we should redesign the size cap that does already exist for U.S. banks, the size cap from the 1994 Riegle-Neal Act. We should redesign it to reflect current realities. And second, we should address the issue that has arisen, in particular over the past few years, of U.S. Government backing for very large financial enterprises that have basically an unlimited ability to take risk around the world.
    I do not, however, think that the exact formulation of the Volcker Rules as put forward is the right way to go. I think, actually, you should consider tightening the restrictions on the largest banks and reducing the size cap, and I would emphasize that our banks are now already much larger as a percent of the--our largest banks as a percent of the economy, a percent of total financial assets, than we have ever seen before in the United States.
    Our largest six banks have assets worth over 60 percent of GDP. This reflects, in addition to what has happened in the financial crisis and the bailout and the rescue, it reflects the underlying concentration of these financial markets. So the big four banks now have more than half of the mortgage market in this country and two-thirds of the market for credit cards. This is unfair competition. Because these banks are too big to fail, they have lower funding costs, they are able to attract more capital, they make more money over the cycle, and they continue to get larger. And I do not think that we have seen the end of this.
    If you look at the European situation today, for example, it is much worse than what we have in this country with regard to the size of the largest banks. Just as one example, the Royal Bank of Scotland peaked with total assets at 125 percent of U.K. GDP. That is a seriously troubled bank that is now the responsibility of the U.K. taxpayer. If we allow our biggest banks to continue to build on these unfair market advantages and the lower funding costs, we will head in the same direction.
    I think I would suggest to you that you consider imposing a size cap on banks relative not to total normal assets or liabilities, which is the Volcker proposal, because that is not bubble-proof. If you have a massive increase in house prices, real estate prices, such as happened in Japan in the 1980s, you will have a big increase in the normal size of bank balance sheets. And when the bubble bursts, you are going to have a big problem. I think the size cap should be redefined as a percent of GDP.
    And I think that while the science on bank size is, to be sure, incomplete and inexact, there is no evidence that I can find of any kind, and I have spent a lot of time talking to technical people from they financial sector and people at central banks, people in the banking system themselves have impressed various points on me. I cannot find anything--I put this in the written testimony--that supports the idea that societies such as ours should have banks with total assets larger than around $100 billion in today's money.
    Now, if you were to impose a size cap of, say, 3 or 5 percent of GDP, no bank can be larger than that size, that would return our biggest banks roughly to the position that they had in the early 1990s. Now, our financial system worked very well in the early 1990s. Goldman Sachs, as one example, was one of the world's top investment banks. I don't think anyone questioned the competitive sector. But since the early 1990s, we have developed a lot more system risk focused on the existence of these very big banks.
    So, as Mr. Corrigan said, the essence of this crisis was lending, but it was lending that at the heart of it was based on the idea you could make nonrecourse loans to people who can walk away from their homes when the house value falls, leaving the bank with huge losses. How do people think this was a good idea? Why did they think that this would survive as a business model? Well, I think it was very much about the size of these banks and very much about the support they expected to receive when they are under duress.
    So in conclusion, I think the Volcker principles are exactly right. I think they are long overdue. I think you should--I hope that you will take them up and develop them further. I think the degree of unfair market competition, the degree to which the community banks are disadvantaged by the current situation, because they have to pay a lot more money--they pay higher interest for funds, their cost of capital is higher--this is unfair. This dynamic will continue unless you put an effective cap on it. The biggest banks will become even larger and even more dangerous.
    Thank you very much.

Chairman Dodd.
 Thank you very much.
    John, welcome again.
      
STATEMENT OF JOHN REED, RETIRED CHAIRMAN, CITIGROUP.

Mr. Reed.
 Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for your kind welcome. Senator Shelby and everybody, I appreciate the opportunity to be with you. I had never anticipated as a retired citizen that I would find myself here, but I really am here to voice support for Mr. Volcker's suggestion, the Volcker Rule.
    I do think that while details have to be worked out and so forth, I think that it is a good suggestion and one that is worthy of consideration by this Committee and the Congress in general.
    I don't say this because I think the absence of that rule was central to the difficulties that we have just come through. I don't think that is the case. But I do say it from the point of view that if we were take a blank piece of paper and we were to say to ourselves, how can we design a financial system that would both serve the public and also be relatively safe and relatively unlikely to have a repeat of what we had, you would start out certainly with capital, which needs to be augmented.
    You would certainly look at the structure of the regulatory framework, which I believe this Committee is doing. But I would argue that you would also look to maybe compartmentalize the industry, not deny any function to the industry in general, but compartmentalize it so as to limit economic spillover.
    But as somebody who has run a large company in this industry for a long time, because of the impact that it has on the culture and the makeup of the various firms, dealing with the capital markets, proprietary trading, proprietary investing, hedge fund market, so forth and so on, each of these bring with them their own culture. These are cultures that have to exist for the particular purpose, but they have their own particular characteristics and there is no question in my mind but these cultures have an impact on the institution within which they are embedded.
    And if I were asked to design a system, I would not allow these kind of cultures and activities to be a part of large depository and traditional lending institutions. It is not that I feel these functions shouldn't exist. I would simply separate them from institutions that are the deposit takers and basically the traditional lenders for much of the economy. And I do this because I think the culture from the capital markets that rubs off has to do with risk taking. It certainly has to do with compensation, and it has to do with the nature of the human fabric of the various entities that we are talking about.
    So I believe as a part of a comprehensive reform that Mr. Volcker's idea with regard to separation of some of these functions makes a lot of sense, not because I am concerned about the economics, but because I am concerned of the nature of the impact that these various activities have on the players and the financial markets.
    With regard to size, I would differ a little bit with Professor Johnson. I think the antitrust laws are quite capable of dealing with size in the marketplace. The place where size is the problem has to do with the intra-industry transactions, the so-called ``counterparty risk.'' This is where the ``too big to fail'' comes into play. It isn't the balance sheet of the bank that is the problem on ``too big to fail.'' It is the interconnectedness of one financial institution with virtually all other financial institutions. And so this is where I believe we must be concerned about size.
    You could deal with size by having capital requirements that relate to the size of intra-industry activity, and obviously increasing capital as intra-industry activity goes up. You also, and this has been proposed and I think it is a good idea, can ask that certain instruments be traded through exchanges. This acts as a circuit breaker, the exchanges. It acts as a circuit breaker in the transmission of difficulties. And you could deal with size by simply putting limitations on counterparty risk, on the degree of leverage that can exist with regard to intra-industry trading.
    So the issue of size, I think, is also relevant, and so I think the two keys to Mr. Volcker's suggestion, that of segregation of function within the industry and particularly the protection of the large deposit-taking institutions and the idea of being concerned about size, have merit and deserve the consideration of this Committee.
    A final comment, if I could. I believe that one of the reasons that JPMorgan Chase did better than many others during this recent crisis is they did not have embedded in that institution a real money market activity, a trading house. JPMorgan Chase was the amalgam of about five commercial banks, but none of them had a big investment banking trading activity in it, and the absence of that kind of function turned out in the crisis to give them a relative strengthened position.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
